useList Docs (#3218)
adobe/react-spectrum: packages/@react-aria/list/docs/useList.mdx

HTML lists are meant for static content, rather than lists with rich interactions like focusable elements within rows, keyboard navigation, row selection, etc.
`useList` helps achieve accessible and interactive list components that can be styled as needed.

* Exposed to assistive technology as a `grid` using ARIA
* Keyboard navigation between rows and in-rows focusable elements via the arrow keys
* Single, multiple, or no row selection via mouse, touch, or keyboard interactions
* Support for disabled rows, which cannot be selected
* Optional support for checkboxes in each row for selection
* Support for both `toggle` and `replace` selection behaviors
* Support for row actions via double click, <Keyboard>Enter</Keyboard> key, or tapping
* Long press to enter selection mode on touch when there is both selection and row actions
* Async loading and infinite scrolling
* Typeahead to allow focusing rows by typing text
* Automatic scrolling support during keyboard navigation
* Labeling support for accessibility
* Ensures that selections are announced using an ARIA live region
* Virtualized scrolling support for performance with large lists

## Anatomy

> <Anatomy />

Author: Added

Dynamic collections, as shown below, can be used when the List data comes from an external data source such as an API, or updates over time.
In the example below, the rows are provided to the List via a render function.

```tsx example export=true
function ExampleList(props) {
  let rows = [
    {id: 1, name: 'Games'},
    {id: 2, name: 'Program Files'},
    {id: 3, name: 'bootmgr'},
    {id: 4, name: 'log.txt'}
  ];

  return (
    <List aria-label="Example dynamic collection List" items={rows} {...props}>
      {item => <Item>{item.name}</Item>}
    </List>
  );
}
```

### Single selection

By default, `useListState` doesn't allow row selection but this can be enabled using the `selectionMode` prop. Use `defaultSelectedKeys` to provide a default set of selected rows.
Note that the value of the selected keys must match the `key` prop of the row.

The example below enables single selection mode, and uses `defaultSelectedKeys` to select the row with key equal to "2".
A user can click on a different row to change the selection, or click on the same row again to deselect it entirely.

```tsx example
// Using the example above

> <ExampleList selectionMode="single" defaultSelectedKeys={[2]} />

Reviewer: You'll want to add aria-labels to the examples below so they can be distinguished from one another

```tsx example
<PokemonList selectionMode="multiple" selectionBehavior="replace" />
```

### Row actions

`useList` supports row actions via the `onAction` prop, which is useful for functionality such as navigation. In the default `"toggle"` selection behavior, when nothing is selected, clicking or tapping the row triggers the row action.
When at least one item is selected, the list is in selection mode, and clicking or tapping a row toggles the selection. Actions may also be triggered via the <Keyboard>Enter</Keyboard> key, and selection using the <Keyboard>Space</Keyboard> key.

This behavior is slightly different in the `"replace"` selection behavior, where single clicking selects the row and actions are performed via double click. On touch devices, the action becomes the primary tap interaction,
and a long press enters into selection mode, which temporarily swaps the selection behavior to `"toggle"` to perform selection (you may wish to display checkboxes when this happens). Deselecting all items exits selection mode
and reverts the selection behavior back to `"replace"`. Keyboard behaviors are unaffected.

```tsx example

> <PokemonList selectionMode="multiple" selectionBehavior="replace" onAction={key => alert(`Opening item ${key}...`)} />

Reviewer: Maybe worthwhile including an example of onAction + selectionMode="toggle"

Author: Added

    gridCellProps,
    isPressed,
    isSelected,
    isFocused,
    isDisabled
  } = useListItem(
    {
      node: item
    },
    state,
    ref
  );
  let {isFocusVisible, focusProps} = useFocusRing();
  let showCheckbox = state.selectionManager.selectionMode !== 'none' && state.selectionManager.selectionBehavior === 'toggle';

  let backgroundColor;
  let color = "black";

  if (isSelected) {
    backgroundColor = "blueviolet";
    color = "white";
  } else if (isFocused) {
    backgroundColor = "gray";
  } else if (isDisabled) {
    backgroundColor = "transparent";
    color = "gray";
  }

  return (
    <li
      {...mergeProps(rowProps, focusProps)}
      ref={ref}
      style={{
        background: isSelected
          ? 'blueviolet'
          : isPressed
            ? 'var(--spectrum-global-color-gray-400)'
            : item.index % 2
              ? 'var(--spectrum-alias-highlight-hover)'
              : 'none',
        color: isSelected ? 'white' : null,
        padding: '2px 5px',
        outline: isFocusVisible ? '2px solid orange' : 'none'
      }}
    >
      {showCheckbox && <ListCheckbox item={item} state={state} />}
      {item.rendered}
    </li>
  );
}

> <List aria-label="Example List">

Author: Added an 'info button' to the examples to demo interaction. Let me know if you had something better in mind.

and a long press enters into selection mode, which temporarily swaps the selection behavior to `"toggle"` to perform selection (you may wish to display checkboxes when this happens). Deselecting all items exits selection mode
and reverts the selection behavior back to `"replace"`. Keyboard behaviors are unaffected.

```tsx example
<PokemonList aria-label="List with replace selection behavior and row actions" selectionMode="multiple" selectionBehavior="replace" onAction={key => alert(`Opening item ${key}...`)} />
```

With `"toggle"` selection behavior, we can show checkboxes for selection while still having row actions. In this case, clicking the checkbox itself will toggle selection of that row, while single clicking anywhere else on the row will trigger the action.
Once one row has been selected, clicking anywhere the rows will select or deselect them.

```tsx example
<PokemonList aria-label="List with toggle selection behavior and row actions" selectionMode="multiple" selectionBehavior="toggle" onAction={key => alert(`Opening item ${key}...`)} />
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should make the above examples and supporting text match the spectrum docs for ListView where it makes sense? Some of them are slightly different from table, and I think text around actions and select behavior has been updated.

Author: Updated the row actions example and text to better match ListView docs. I wasn't sure what would be a good alternative for selection, since ListView docs focus on `selectionStyle`, which is a spectrum prop. Take a look at that section when it builds and let me know if there are any specific changes that would be better

Reviewer: IMO, you can borrow the following copy from the ListView docs from Selection Behavior:
```
In the highlight selection style, however, clicking a row with the mouse replaces the selection with only that row. Using the arrow keys moves both focus and selection. To select multiple rows, modifier keys such as Ctrl, Cmd, and Shift can be used. On touch screen devices, selection always behaves as toggle since modifier keys may not be available.

These selection styles implement the behaviors defined in [Aria Practices](https://w3c.github.io/aria-practices/#listbox_kbd_interaction).
```
At the very least, including the aria practices link will be helpful for the user in explaining all the interaction combinations

HTML lists are meant for static content, rather than lists with rich interactions like focusable elements within rows, keyboard navigation, row selection, etc.
`useList` helps achieve accessible and interactive list components that can be styled as needed.

* Exposed to assistive technology as a `grid` using ARIA
* Keyboard navigation between rows and in-rows focusable elements via the arrow keys
* Single, multiple, or no row selection via mouse, touch, or keyboard interactions
* Support for disabled rows, which cannot be selected
* Optional support for checkboxes in each row for selection
* Support for both `toggle` and `replace` selection behaviors
* Support for row actions via double click, <Keyboard>Enter</Keyboard> key, or tapping
* Long press to enter selection mode on touch when there is both selection and row actions
* Async loading and infinite scrolling
* Typeahead to allow focusing rows by typing text
* Automatic scrolling support during keyboard navigation
* Labeling support for accessibility
* Ensures that selections are announced using an ARIA live region
* Virtualized scrolling support for performance with large lists

## Anatomy

> <Anatomy />

Reviewer: The selected row background color is kinda hard to distinguish in dark mode, can you change that color to whatever we are currently using for our ListView? I think I used `var(--spectrum-alias-highlight-selected)`

Author: good catch, fixed

import {useFocusRing} from '@react-aria/focus';
import {useButton} from '@react-aria/button';
import {useList, useListItem} from '@react-aria/list';
import { Item } from "@react-stately/collections";

function List(props) {
  let state = useListState(props);
  let ref = useRef();
  let { collection } = state;
  let { gridProps } = useList(props, state, ref);

  return (
    <ul
      {...gridProps}
      ref={ref}
      style={{
        padding: 0,
        margin: '5px 0',
        listStyle: 'none',
        border: '1px solid gray',
        maxWidth: 400
      }}
    >
      {[...collection].map((item) => (
        <ListItem key={item.key} item={item} state={state} />
      ))}
    </ul>
  );
}

function ListItem({ item, state }) {
  let ref = React.useRef();

  let {
    rowProps,
    gridCellProps,
    isPressed,
    isSelected,
    isFocused,
    isDisabled
  } = useListItem(
    {
      node: item
    },
    state,
    ref
  );
  let {isFocusVisible, focusProps} = useFocusRing();
  let showCheckbox = state.selectionManager.selectionMode !== 'none' && state.selectionManager.selectionBehavior === 'toggle';
  let buttonRef = React.useRef();
  let { buttonProps } = useButton({

>     onPress: () => alert('Info pressed...')

Reviewer: Might be nice to add the key/something in the alert message to distinguish between the info buttons presses

Author: Went ahead and included a collapsed Button component for this

a <TypeLink links={selectionDocs.links} type={selectionDocs.exports.SelectionManager} />,
which makes use of the collection to provide an interface to update the selection state.
For more information, see [Selection](/react-stately/selection.html).

## Example

Lists are [collection components](../react-stately/collections.html) that include rows as child elements.
In this example, we'll use the standard HTML unordered list elements along with hooks from React
Aria for each child. You may also use other elements like `<div>` to render these components as appropriate.
We'll walk through creating the list container and list item, then add some additional behavior such as selection.

The <TypeLink links={docs.links} type={docs.exports.useList} /> hook will be used to render the outer most list element. It uses
the <TypeLink links={statelyDocs.links} type={statelyDocs.exports.useListState} /> hook to construct the list's collection of rows,
and manage state such as the focused row and row selection. We'll use the collection to iterate through
the rows of the List and render the relevant components, which we'll define below.

> You may notice the extra `<div>` with `gridCellProps` in our example. This is needed because we are following the [ARIA grid pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/grid/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may notice the extra `<div>` with `gridCellProps` in our example. This is needed because we are following the [ARIA grid pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/grid/), which does not allow rows without any child `gridcell` elements.
```

    isPressed,
    isSelected,
    isFocused,
    isDisabled
  } = useListItem(
    {
      node: item
    },
    state,
    ref
  );
  let {isFocusVisible, focusProps} = useFocusRing();
  let showCheckbox = state.selectionManager.selectionMode !== 'none' && state.selectionManager.selectionBehavior === 'toggle';

  let backgroundColor;
  let color = "black";

  if (isSelected) {
    backgroundColor = "blueviolet";
    color = "white";
  } else if (isFocused) {
    backgroundColor = "gray";
  } else if (isDisabled) {
    backgroundColor = "transparent";
    color = "gray";
  }

  return (
    <li
      {...mergeProps(rowProps, focusProps)}
      ref={ref}
      style={{
        background: isSelected
          ? 'blueviolet'
          : isPressed
            ? 'var(--spectrum-global-color-gray-400)'
            : item.index % 2
              ? 'var(--spectrum-alias-highlight-hover)'
              : 'none',
        color: isSelected ? 'white' : null,
        padding: '2px 5px',
        outline: isFocusVisible ? '2px solid orange' : 'none'
      }}
    >
      <div {...gridCellProps}>
        {showCheckbox && <ListCheckbox item={item} state={state} />}
        {item.rendered}

>         <span style={{float: 'right'}}>

Reviewer 2: I appreciate the `float`. 😄 

Maybe better to add `display: 'flex', justifyContent: 'space-between'` to the `<li>` style instead? Then you don't need this extra element.

>           <Button onPress={() => alert(`Info for item ${item.key}`)}>Info</Button>

Reviewer 2: I think this is ok since we call it out above, but I wonder whether it's also clear that user content (i.e. children of `<Item>`) may also contain interactive children? I guess that might be more common than a hard coded interactive element within every item?

Author: Updated to use Button as a child in a few items on the page. I think this is a lot cleaner than every item, and is probably more common as you mentioned.

        </span>
      </div>
    </li>
  );
}

<List aria-label="Example List" selectionMode="multiple" selectionBehavior="replace">
  <Item key="1">Charizard</Item>
  <Item key="2">Blastoise</Item>
  <Item key="3">Venusaur</Item>
  <Item key="4">Pikachu</Item>
</List>
```

### Adding selection checkboxes

Next, let's add support for selection checkboxes. For multiple selection, we'll want to add a checkbox to the row to allow the user to select rows.
This is done using the <TypeLink links={docs.links} type={docs.exports.useListSelectionCheckbox} />
hook. It is passed the `parentKey` of the cell, which refers to the row the cell is contained within. When the user
checks or unchecks the checkbox, the row will be added or removed from the List's selection.

In this example, we pass the result of the `checkboxProps` into the <TypeLink links={checkboxDocs.links} type={checkboxDocs.exports.useCheckbox} />
hook and render an `<input>` element directly, but it's likely you'll have a `Checkbox` component in your component library that uses these hooks already.

> See the [useCheckbox docs](useCheckbox.html) for more information.

Reviewer 2: Need to update this paragraph now that you've moved this to a separate component, e.g. "The `Checkbox` component used in this example is independent, and can be used separately from `List`. See below for the code." etc.

```tsx example export=true render=false
import {useListSelectionCheckbox} from '@react-aria/list';

// Reuse the Checkbox from your component library. See below for details.
import {Checkbox} from 'your-component-library';

function ListCheckbox({ item, state }) {
  let ref = useRef();
  let { checkboxProps } = useListSelectionCheckbox({ key: item.key }, state);

  return (
    <span ref={ref}>
      <Checkbox {...checkboxProps} />
    </span>
  );
}
```

> ### Checkbox

Reviewer 2: I'd move these sections to the bottom, after the example. It was a bit weird because currently the example seems to be inside the `Button` section.

It's as simple as setting the `selectionMode` prop to `"multiple"`.

```tsx example
<List aria-label="List with selection" selectionMode="multiple">
  <Item key="1">Charizard</Item>
  <Item key="2">Blastoise</Item>
  <Item key="3">Venusaur</Item>
  <Item key="4">Pikachu</Item>
</List>
```

And that's it! We now have a fully interactive List component that can support keyboard navigation, single or multiple selection.
In addition, it is fully accessible for screen readers and other assistive technology. See below for more
examples of how to use the List component that we've built.

## Usage

### Dynamic collections

So far, our examples have shown static collections, where the data is hard coded.
Dynamic collections, as shown below, can be used when the List data comes from an external data source such as an API, or updates over time.
In the example below, the rows are provided to the List via a render function.

```tsx example export=true
function ExampleList(props) {
  let rows = [
    {id: 1, name: 'Games'},
    {id: 2, name: 'Program Files'},
    {id: 3, name: 'bootmgr'},
    {id: 4, name: 'log.txt'}
  ];

  return (

>     <List aria-label="Example dynamic collection List" selectionMode="single" items={rows} {...props}>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <List aria-label="Example dynamic collection List" selectionMode="multiple" items={rows} {...props}>
```

Single selection with checkboxes is weird, maybe keep single selection to highlight, or switch to multi for checkboxes.

      {item => <Item>{item.name}</Item>}
    </List>
  );
}
```

### Single selection

By default, `useListState` doesn't allow row selection but this can be enabled using the `selectionMode` prop. Use `defaultSelectedKeys` to provide a default set of selected rows.
Note that the value of the selected keys must match the `key` prop of the row.

The example below enables single selection mode, and uses `defaultSelectedKeys` to select the row with key equal to "2".
A user can click on a different row to change the selection, or click on the same row again to deselect it entirely.

```tsx example
// Using the example above

> <ExampleList aria-label="List with single selection" selectionMode="single" defaultSelectedKeys={[2]} />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<ExampleList aria-label="List with single selection" selectionMode="single" selectionBehavior="replace" defaultSelectedKeys={[2]} />
```

```

### Multiple selection

Multiple selection can be enabled by setting `selectionMode` to `multiple`.

```tsx example
// Using the example above
<ExampleList aria-label="List with multiple selection" selectionMode="multiple" defaultSelectedKeys={[2, 4]} />
```

### Disallow empty selection

List also supports a `disallowEmptySelection` prop which forces the user to have at least one row in the List selected at all times.
In this mode, if a single row is selected and the user presses it, it will not be deselected.

```tsx example
// Using the example above

> <ExampleList aria-label="List with disallowed empty selection" selectionMode="single" defaultSelectedKeys={[2]} disallowEmptySelection />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<ExampleList aria-label="List with disallowed empty selection" selectionMode="multiple" defaultSelectedKeys={[2]} disallowEmptySelection />
```

These selection styles implement the behaviors defined in [Aria Practices](https://w3c.github.io/aria-practices/#listbox_kbd_interaction).

```tsx example
<PokemonList aria-label="List with replace selection behavior" selectionMode="multiple" selectionBehavior="replace" />
```

### Row actions

`useList` supports row actions via the `onAction` prop, which is useful for functionality such as navigation. When nothing is selected, the list performs actions by default when clicking or tapping a row.
Items may be selected using the checkbox, or by long pressing on touch devices. When at least one item is selected, the list is in selection mode, and clicking or tapping a row toggles the selection. Actions may also
be triggered via the <Keyboard>Enter</Keyboard> key, and selection using the <Keyboard>Space</Keyboard> key.

> This behavior is slightly different in the highlight selection style, where single clicking selects the row and actions are performed via double click. Touch and keyboard behaviors are unaffected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This behavior is slightly different when `selectionBehavior="replace"`, where single clicking selects the row and actions are performed via double click. Touch and keyboard behaviors are unaffected.
```

By default, `useList` uses the `"toggle"` selection behavior, which behaves like a checkbox group: clicking, tapping, or pressing the <Keyboard>Space</Keyboard> or <Keyboard>Enter</Keyboard> keys toggles selection for the focused row. Using the arrow keys moves focus but does not change selection. The `"toggle"` selection mode is often paired with a checkbox in each row as an explicit affordance for selection.

> In the highlight selection style, however, clicking a row with the mouse replaces the selection with only that row. Using the arrow keys moves both focus and selection. To select multiple rows, modifier keys such as <Keyboard>Ctrl</Keyboard>, <Keyboard>Cmd</Keyboard>, and <Keyboard>Shift</Keyboard> can be used. On touch screen devices, selection always behaves as toggle since modifier keys may not be available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `selectionBehavior` is set to `"replace"`, clicking a row with the mouse replaces the selection with only that row. Using the arrow keys moves both focus and selection. To select multiple rows, modifier keys such as <Keyboard>Ctrl</Keyboard>, <Keyboard>Cmd</Keyboard>, and <Keyboard>Shift</Keyboard> can be used. On touch screen devices, selection always behaves as toggle since modifier keys may not be available.
```
